On January 18 1994 independent council
Lawrence Walsh delivered his final
report on the iran-contra affair
thus concluding his seven-year
investigation in it he assailed
President Bush for pardoning caspar
weinberger and five others on Christmas
Eve 1992 he also said there was
insufficient evidence to prosecute
Presidents Bush and Reagan
I have a have a very brief statement and
then I'll take whatever questions you
may have
today the the panel of senior judges who
appoint independent counsel made public
the final report on the iran-contra
criminal investigations and prosecutions
this report is likely to be the last
official word on iran-contra it was
publicly exposed seven years ago and the
activities prompted my appointment in
December of 1986 at that time the public
trust in government had been badly
shaken as a result of the revelations
that the Reagan administration had been
secretly selling arms to Iran that it
had been secretly supporting the Contra
military effort in Nicaragua and that
there had been an intermingling of those
two operations in the diversion of Iran
arms sales proceeds to the Contras much
is now known about these matters and how
they evolve and who was responsible this
final report fully describes our
findings and prosecutorial decisions
unlike earlier reports by the tower
Commission and the congressional
iran-contra committees our report
focuses on the criminal dimension of the
affair those earlier in investigations
were obstructed by lies and other means
our report
therefore adds some new facts to this
doric record the application of the
criminal law to iran-contra was a
time-consuming expensive and often
imperfect process
yet it is difficult to see how corners
might have been cut the mandate given to
me by the appointing court was very
broad the broadest the court has ever
granted the investigation involved
individuals and the White House the CIA
and the State and Defense Department as
well as the National Security Council
and even the Department of Justice it
required a review of hundreds of
thousands of documents some of the most
significant were withheld until very
late the activities occurred in more
than a dozen countries and were cloaked
in secrecy even after the operations
were exposed claims of national security
thwarted complete prosecutorial scrutiny
finally congressional grants of immunity
made some prosecutions unwieldy and
resulted in overturned convictions for
oliver north and John Poindexter despite
these obstacles indictments were
returned cases were brought to court
convictions were obtained and the
investigation proceeded the final report
describes the 14 cases in which criminal
charges were brought as well as the
investigations of 17 other individuals
the law required that I set forth fully
and completely a description of my work
including the disposition disposition of
all cases brought and their reasons for
not prosecuting any matter within my
jurisdiction to fulfill this requirement
it was necessary to lay out all of the
facts to fully explain my decisions to
prosecute or to decline prosecution the
report explains the most significant
facts we uncovered who was criminally
responsible and why the investigation
and prosecutions proceeded as they did
the purpose was was to give the court
and now the public a full accounting of
our work
I believe that the mandate given to me
in December of 1986 has been fulfilled
and that the office of independent
counsel did everything it reasonably
could to see that the rule of law was
administered fairly the final report
will now allow others to decide whether
the job was done correctly do you feel
that justice was done oh yeah I think of
I think what Justice Holmes said about
justice once justice and the application
of the law are not always concurrent the
the the justice was done to the extent
that the law reasonably applied could
achieve it
it's a justice is a difficult concept to
to deal with and to ever satisfy fully
but in terms of the prosecutions that
were able to be carried through the the
maze and thicket of the criminal
procedures and the information that
accompanied it I believe that justice
was done to the extent that it could be
reasonably done he thinks that a number
of those involved got off easy
I think in terms of sentences imposed on
other people it may seem that way but I
think it's also important to realize
that the courts in imposing sentence
were dealing with persons who had
invested in enormous amounts in in
public service and its service to the
country they were giving up the full
value of that investment when they were
convicted or pleaded guilty and I think
the courts took that into account I
think also the sentencing courts in the
may have been inhibited by immunity
granted in in some of the cases they
were not anxious to challenge the
appellate court any more than they had
to but those were two factors I think
you think that presidents Reagan and
Bush still have a lot to answer for with
this I think President Bush will always
have to answer for his pardons I think
that was the most unjustifiable Act
there were there was no public purpose
served by that the others who tried to
serve President Reagan's policy thought
they were serving the public but
President Bush can never justify the
pardons as a public as an act of public
service President Reagan on the other
hand was carrying out policies that he
strongly believed he may have been
willful but he at least he thought he
was serving the country and what he did
and the fact that he disregarded certain
laws and statutes in the course of it
was not because of any any possibly
self-centered purpose their respective
places in history given the next
findings
- will affect their respective places in
history given the next findings about
the two presidents I there's an echo and
I'm not sure how how do I think it would
affect whose place in history Bush and
Reagan Bush is in Reagan's and I just
don't know that the public the American
public is very perceptive and it forms
its own evaluations and the the areas of
conduct that are described in this
report and that we have focused on are
simply one part of a very large field of
activity and because one type of
activity may be subject to criticism
there were other areas of activity that
may be subject to praise and in the
American public will with great
intelligence take all that into account
judge Walsh do you think okay at one
part of the report you say that you
concluded that no criminal charges
should be brought against President
Reagan Vice President Bush Edwin Meese
or Donald Regan because the belated
production of notes and other documents
had delayed your investigation beyond
the point where it could be effective
but at a couple of other points you say
the fundamental reason for lack of
prosecutorial effort was that there was
just no evidence beyond a reasonable
doubt against those gentlemen is there
any inconsistency there no I think that
I'm not sure exactly if the language
we're talking but I think that the the
arguments are cumulative the if there's
if there is a in the areas where we say
there is no basis for a prosecution that
then we add to it the the the product of
questions of delay in some areas there
were possibilities not necessarily as to
those individuals you mentioned but
there were would have been possibilities
of prosecution if we
had the information earlier but that
that wasn't the problems I remembered as
President Reagan the President Reagan we
concluded that there was no no evidence
that justified a criminal consideration
how do you how do you sir have a respond
to the criticism that this gives those
mentioned no due process it gives them
no day in court it's a it's a very it is
a very disturbing position for a
prosecutor to be in and it was also a
very disturbing position for the court
to be put in and I'm glad you raised it
and give me an opportunity to explain
exactly what is required by the statute
at the time the statute creating the
Independent Counsel was passed the
Senate was concerned that in an earlier
investigation the prosecutors had made a
rather condensed report and had then
written books and the Senate wanted it
it's in the legislative history in the
Senate side that's where I speak of the
Senate but Congress wanted independent
counsel to be required to report fully
if he had anything to say let him say it
in a report which was to be submitted to
the court which appointed and they also
were concerned that the public and the
courts might think that independent
prosecutors had in a sense whitewashed
the case that they had had not fully
exercised their powers and so it has a
dual requirement not only that a
prosecutor must explain why he
prosecuted someone even more difficult
he must explain why he did not prosecute
someone if it could be argued that that
person was within the jurisdiction given
him by the court now in most cases this
is simple because all previous
independent counsel I can think of
under the statute we're dealing with a
single individual
so you either indicted him or you didn't
indict but my my mandate was so broad
there are a large number of people were
embraced within it and I didn't as the
report discloses I didn't attempt it to
take up the case of everybody arguably
within it I just took those as who had
been perhaps the most active in it now
the second thing that I think we must
bear in mind is that I was reporting to
the court just the same as a private
lawyer would report to his board of
directors or the board of directors of
his client it was my job to under the
statute and if you look at the
legislative history which which is
enclosed in the first part of volumes
vol 3 under the statute it is to report
in detail why I didn't prosecute and it
was my judgment that this required made
a report to the court in very
unvarnished terms and it would then be a
second question for that court to decide
whether it should be made public in
other words the report I wrote was for
the court that appointed me whether that
was to be let be made public was a
decision for the court that that
reviewed it and that court that took
great pains to protect those mentioned
it gave it gave them four months to
respond to what was said about them they
were all furnished with the parts of the
report that spoke of them and they were
given an opportunity to write whatever
they wished in response to it and you
will notice that the reason the volume
of responses is longer than the report
itself and that some of them are quite
lengthy but I think it's important to
realize that the report and the first
instance was intended for the court and
in my judgment it was been wrong for me
the sugarcoat the report or curtail it
just to enhance
chance of publication and I did not I
wrote it exactly as as I saw it okay yes
sir
what are your reflections on your own
role your own work on this report so
long process how do you feel about your
own role do you you have any any kind of
self criticism wish you had done certain
things sooner or perhaps if you had had
more time more of a budget the result
might have been different there might
have been more indictments earlier yeah
you know I I think it's a very proper
question and it's one that I have
tortured myself with from from time to
time
I think the first there weren't there
were some mistakes of judgment that that
I I don't think think they affected the
ultimate outcome but they may have made
it take a little longer than it
otherwise would
i I I underestimated the job when I took
it I thought I could handle it with ten
lawyers in the Watergate investigation
Archie Cox was much wiser he had a
bigger staff he subdivided into teams
very early
I came more slowly to that realization
my my decision to expand was goaded by
the fact that I other the Congress was
threatening to grant immunity and so
that I realized that although I might
like to work at a more leisurely pace I
wasn't going to have that choice the
second question was whether I should
have attempted to have asked the grand
jury for an indictment of North and
Poindexter limited to the obstruction
charges before immunity was granted we
had an obstruction case earlier it
wasn't and that would have left out the
any charge of the diversion and perhaps
the underlying conspiracy the reason we
couldn't move quickly on the diversion
was that we could not get the Swiss
records Switzerland is very protective
of its banking records and although
those
records were requested in December of
1986 they weren't produced until
November of 1987 long after the
congressional hearings had terminated so
unless I wanted to proceed on hearsay
which would have been a very risky in a
case like this I wanted to see those
records myself before we proceeded so
the question would be whether to
fragment the cases or the prosecute
solely on a fragment because if you know
once one of those once one of those
indictments was returned that was going
to absorb enormous parts of the energy
of the investigation both both of these
gentlemen were very well represented and
once an indictments out there the
investigations course has changed
permanently it gets into a mode of
reading to trial defending post
indictment motions and it was a serious
danger of it of it D railing the the
investigation of that period it also -
projected me in a head-on conflict with
Congress I don't know what would have
happened whether Congress would have
persisted in attempting to compel the
testimony of these two persons whether
they would have respected a grant of
immunity under those circumstances
whether a court would have compelled
them to accept immunity under those
circumstances whatever would happen
would be a three-way controversy between
Congress and us and the defendants and
the control of it would shift to the
courts and away from the investigation
and myself so then under these
circumstances we took the other course
of trying to protect our investigation
from the immunized testimony and we went
to great lengths to do it and as far as
our own organization was concerned that
we were successful even the appellate
courts that reversed the convictions
found that we had indeed avoided taint
the investigative and prosecutorial team
the trouble was that with the widespread
publicity that accompanied this
testimony it was impossible to isolate
witnesses from it and that in the end
even though Judge Gesell and we
attempted to meet that problem by
instructing every witness not to supply
us with any information they didn't know
themselves before the immuno immunized
testimony the courts the appellate court
felt that was not a sufficient safeguard
so those those are the two areas now the
third point where we had to make a major
decision was after the conviction of
Poindexter at that point the operational
conspiracy we sort of have divided the
our work into sort of two areas when the
operational conspiracy of Poindexter
North McFarland see court 19 and the the
Supervisory and and and assisting groups
who withheld information as to their
contribution so at the end of Poindexter
we had completed the work on the
operation of conspiracy see Court had
been convicted hacky but been convicted
McFarland had pleaded guilty North had
been convicted at that point and now
Poindexter the and so a strong argument
could be made that's a good time to quit
you're ahead but it seemed to us that we
couldn't say our job was done until we
try to get the testimony of Poindexter
and and north however unwilling and we
couldn't do that until there
they've been convicted we couldn't do it
while they were awaiting trial there's
no way to force that so that's what we
did and that proved a very laborious
process North in particular engaged in
extensive litigation to prevent our
doing that and that all of this drags
out time time is always hurting it
always hurts the prosecution in any set
and under any circumstances but where
you have a temporary office and you're
holding together people who aren't here
firmly they're all taking time out from
what they're they plan to do for their
professional activities and we're
running a great expense because GSA
couldn't find us space like this that it
didn't cost very much we ended up in
explaining expensive rent not only for
ourselves but we had to rent an equally
I saw almost equally large office for
the defense so we could make a skiff out
of it so they could have classified
afraid so we were we were if we were
with we were unable to curtail our
expense and we are at the mercy of those
who are dragging out time now that all
that's all was done now we you begin to
say [ __ ] should you call it quits you
just say this is just too much to
survive and believe me at times I
thought of that but it always seemed to
me we had a job to do and that it wasn't
finished until we got north and
Poindexter's testimony and about that
time we began to get find that our
document requests had not been honored
by secretary Weinberger and even in the
State Department and that we were
getting documents that were disclosing
new information there particularly about
the 1985 arms transactions and it it
began become clear that the in the
congressional committees had been lying
to the Weinberger had told them that he
did not have notes he sat as close to
them as that chair is to me and his desk
is here foot with drawers full of notes
and he's sitting there saying that he
didn't have any and then he makes a note
of what he of the interview and puts it
in the drawer with his notes after
everybody goes now this this we found
out much later well now with that kind
of information you can't just walk away
you have to evaluate it even though
you're no late prosecution's are hardly
ever welcome and they're extremely
difficult and at the same time the CIA
activities were becoming more clear to
us their cables cable traffic was very
hard to decipher and to understand and
some of the associate counsel did an
outstanding job of sifting it out and
understanding it and Fernandez even
after he had escaped prosecution because
the CIA wouldn't release wouldn't
release non secret classified
information gave gave testimony that was
helpful and so it ended up in a plea of
guilty by fires and when fires cooperate
that again open the new dimension so
even though the costs were running up
and we were maintaining these offices
for the defense and office for us that
never seemed to us that we couldn't walk
away from it and so that's that's
essentially the story of it now we we
fully believed that that the cases that
we had pending at the end of last year
the end of 1992 against Weinberger and
and Claridge should have been prosecuted
and there was no excuse for the pardon
but at that point that
it seemed to us that the time had been
reached to to really to give up that in
a sense the combined forces have of
congressional immunity on one side and
presidential pardons on the other and
classified information control on the
third were almost becoming
insurmountable at any degree of
reasonable expense of time and money so
we concluded at that point we considered
whether the investigation should
continue on any of President Bush's
conduct included it should not picture
in the report of a broad cover-up do you
think the pardon was part of the
cover-up I I had no proof that the
pardon was was was was deceived for that
purpose no proof that I could have used
in any proper investigation or
prosecution no I'm sorry do you think
that the appeals courts that overturned
both North and Poindexter convictions
injected politics into their
interpretation of the immunity statute I
think that it's a very difficult
question and a Casta car case that that
set the guidelines for what could be
done after immunity was granted needed
to be filmed out and I think the the the
the majority of the court took a a
strong view that that that protection
should be extremely full and they they
expressed that I it does mean that
I think the views of some of those in
the congressional committees that there
was a possibility of concurrent activity
that the Congress could investigate on
television and that the criminal
prosecution could also go on was just
proved to be wrong and I think the
lesson is very clear as we spelled out
in the report that Congress is going
Congress has control of its for its a
political decision as to which is more
important but it can't have both if it
wants to proceed with a joint committee
or a special committee or to have to
compel testimony by granting immunity it
has to realize that the odds are very
strong that it's going to kill any
resulting product criminal prosecution
if all the facts that are now known had
been known in 1987 for example do you
think it would have been appropriate for
Congress to consider impeachment either
President Reagan or of attorney general
niece the the the question is whether it
should be considered it certainly should
have been considered whether it would
ever reach that point I think is
doubtful but the fact is Congress was
deprived of that opportunity by the
withholding of notes by secretary
Weinberger and by the stand by secretary
Schultz's system Charles Hill those
those notes I think would have made
Congress think when you think of it
Congress didn't even call Vice President
Bush or President Reagan it didn't even
ask for their depositions it didn't even
ask for interrogatory answers it went
off on the theory of a runaway
conspiracy which was which had proved to
be an unsound thesis you and then I'm up
there okay mr. Walsh I wonder how you
feel that one of the principal outcomes
of this whole laborious difficult affair
has been but Oliver North has become a
millionaire and a candidates the United
States
Senate you're always asked the very
penetrating question I I don't think
that is the proper subject for my i
comment i i i think that the
investigation of Colonel north proceeded
as vigorously as it could the trial
proceeded vigorously the jury jury of
plain ordinary people returned their
verdicts of guilty on three felony
counts the Court of Appeals reversed it
and under the law the there is no no
barrier to is pursuing whatever career
he made they see yes judge could you
address procedurally speaking what's
ramifications might be if secretary
Weinberger or anyone else who made false
statements under 1001 in the past if
they were to do so in the future about
the same set of facts in other words if
five years after the first in a
statement they repeat that in a
statement
well he's yes but he's but he's got the
party no there's how does the pardon
factor is but I don't think the pardon
protects them for future and
misstatements so that it there should be
a future mistake blame the controversial
parts of the report on the law namely
that you have to explain why you didn't
prosecute do you think that section of
the law should be repealed as Congress
is considering or do you think it's a
good I I've thought about that I haven't
expressed any views on it I I don't know
what what other way there is to keep an
independent counsel under some sort of
supervision without destroying his
independence the idea is that in the
in other words the the appointing court
had no supervisory control of me and
wasn't responsible in any way from my
activities but it somehow it seems even
at the end a an independent council with
that much power should have to account
for what he did and I think Congress is
concerned that it wanted to be assured
that not only were the convictions and
were the prosecutions justified but also
that the failure to prosecute was
justified
particularly when you're bringing a
lawyer in from from private life it's
not as though I were doing this day in
and day out and and or I was had a
confirmation by the Senate and they'd
had a chance to examine me I was
appointed outside of government and
there had to be and I think the court
and Morrison against Olson the Supreme
Court was was somewhat mollified by the
fact that there was a reporting
requirement and so I don't know what the
the answer I don't know any better
system than one we have which which this
this court mother the court that pointed
me has has gone to great lengths to
protect the individuals from any
excesses of my report on the other hand
as I said earlier I don't I couldn't a
shirt okay coat the report just to
encourage publication I had to report to
the court at that point it's a private
report and the court had to make its
decision as to whether the public is
best served notwithstanding possible
injustice to some of the individuals
from some overstatement by me we've
tried to write the report and has in
moderate away as we could but other
opinions will differ on that and they
have made very clear that they don't
quite agree
look didn't oppose publication of the
report oh no no no I that I hoped it
would be published but I on the other
hand I was unwilling to offer the
content of the report to encourage
publication it seemed to me my first
duties to the court then secondly and
hopefully to the public and to Congress
yes it the report essentially says that
they got away the Reagan White House got
away with a cover-up having been
immersed in this for several years now
do you see any way to prevent future
from administration's from essentially
doing the same thing yes I only think
you know it's a clumsy and expensive way
to do it but is by having them
prosecuted I mean that that is the
justification for the Independent
Counsel Act where the Attorney General I
know and I don't mean to yeah what this
is apart from any claim of misconduct
where any attorney general is advising
the President and feels a sense toward
it it's difficult for that person to
turn around and be the prosecutorial
officer and that's the essence of the
Independent Counsel Act so I I don't you
know expensive and cumbersome though it
is and time-consuming though it is I
don't I have not been able to think of a
better systems of the Reagan White House
got away with what they tried to do I
mean a few people ended up getting
nabbed they were at the lower level well
the problem Caillat and in in the slow
production of records and that that can
happen in any kind of litigation I
there it is a problem found both in
private life and in government life as
you get closer to the top of an area of
responsibility that it's that the person
at the top is protected by his
subordinates to an extent and you'll
have to work through that kind of
barrier and that takes time and if it's
complicated by withholding records then
it results sometimes in a non non
complete accomplishment yes sir judge
Walsh one section of your report which
you referred to as a brief section
referred directly to the the special
division is still sealed it's still
classified connect can you tell us what
that what generically that section of
the report contains why it still remains
to be classified and do in fact Clinton
administration officials still believe
that information is classified and
lastly is it your view that in order to
maintain the independence of the
Independent Counsel there needs to be a
process that removes from the agencies
involved in these investigations the
final declassification authority okay
take it step by step the the the
appendix is relatively thin but it is an
appendix of material that for the
interagency group felt was not right for
class for declassification the
interagency group has been a has really
done outstanding service for us and
trying to get quick answers for us on
these questions of classification and so
we accept that determination and I I
these are these are career officers and
in both administration's is the real
coming out of the next question even
when the interagency group feels that
something is classified and must
continue to be then you have you go to
the discretionary level above that for
declassification
particularly for litigation and as we
all know that that goes to the to the
agency then they they they I actually
have an interagency group of high
officials who consider it and in the end
the Attorney General makes a decision he
can overrule the decision of the
intelligence agencies if he sees fit now
problem comes that the Attorney General
knows his own cases or can be informed
of them and and he can make a judgement
of the value based on what the
intelligence agency tell of the material
is going to be disclosed the true nature
of its secrecy and its importance to the
case that his department is trying but
when the Attorney General disqualifies
himself because of a conflict of
interest and retains that power that
gives him the power to kill the the
prosecution of an independent counsel
frequently when he doesn't know the full
significance and in our case we were
quite disturbed that we weren't even
talked to I was we were not given an
opportunity to present our views to this
interagency meeting of high-level people
or to the Attorney General himself on on
the on the fernandes matter he concluded
that it was not a worthwhile prosecution
so and I think the response of Fernandez
has his is the paper he filed appended
to it and in volume three now in the
report what is the solution is it the
solution it seemed to us was not to give
the Independent Counsel the power that
the Attorney General has because a
transient I don't think should be
entrusted with the power to declassify
documents but there should be a group in
which the Independent Counsel is either
a
or had an opportunity to make his
presentation I wrote the prayer wrote
President Bush saying that we were going
to get into this box and the this
council wrote back that that wasn't
presidential problem he's quite content
to have it go the way it was going to go
but I I do think that there should be
some kind of a reviewing agency other
than the disqualified Attorney General
and the second thing is there should be
some kind of written standards now
they're not always a very perfect
solution to things but at least have
some kind of standards set out so we
know when classified information is
critical to national security
if it's already exposed and everybody in
Nicaragua and the United States know the
information why must that be held
classified just to preserve deniability
that's it there should ought to be some
some articulated basis against which the
particular incident can be measured yeah
yes just a quick follow-up to that then
youth do you feel the Freedom of
Information Act should be altered in any
particular manner to accommodate that
and who should have authority over that
in cases like these I you know I I think
it would be inappropriate for me to talk
about the Freedom of Information Act I
haven't really concentrated on it i I've
been proud preoccupied with my own field
and it seems to me if if we can't even
get the information for a government
conducted criminal prosecution it's a
much more difficult question to say they
should be dispersed publicly but I
haven't really thought about it yes
judge won't you say that Congress
incorrectly characterizes the
iran-contra affair as a rogue operation
in the White House what's the right way
to characterize the right way to
characterize it is a a willful pair of
activities embraced by a president
and and carried out by persons who
wanted to achieve his goals and found
they could not do it without without
running a risk of violating the law in
other words it wasn't a they didn't run
off by themselves to violate the law
they were they thought they were
carrying out his wishes and they had
them the backing of very high government
officials and the agencies in the State
Department the the the Defense
Department and the CIA so it is in no
sense a rogue operation just aborted
confusion here on the one hand you say
that a former President Bush is gonna
have to live with his pardon of
Weinberger that there was no public
policy justification for it but on the
other hand you say you have no proof
that it was part of the cover-up what do
you think the purpose of the pardon was
that I you know it it's one thing for me
to say what I can prove in a criminal
investigation of prosecution it would be
another thing for me to speculate on it
and I I came pretty close to doing that
a year ago and I'm not sure I ought to
ought to repeat it now I I really think
that this is the end and not the
beginning and I let the report speak for
itself yes in your conclusion you say
that President Reagan and others skirted
the law yes how close did President
Reagan come to breaking along how close
did you come to indict him the latter
question is easier answered we didn't
come close to indict him how close he
came to skirting it depends upon how you
evaluate his activities under the
circumstances of the time as we outlined
them in our report and in view of the
testimony of Admiral Poindexter and
Admiral and
Colonel North Colonel North thought he
had the president's approval for what he
did
planed extra said he never told the
president about the diversion he said
that he felt that if he had told them he
would have been approved which gives
some indication of the climate of the
situation but that he wanted to preserve
the president's deniability
and you take that as the center of your
your analysis and then look at the
circumstances around it the repeated
confrontations by the Iranian
negotiators the disappointments one
after another and you say why why what
are you saying then that was how close
did the president come to breaking along
IIIi have told you that there were as
far as our proof was concerned he didn't
and we didn't come close come close to
proving that he did report you say that
you feel that that the President Ronald
Reagan knew about the diversion because
he would not have accepted the affront
we don't say that that's what they say
we say but we don't quite say that we
say that that you have to analyze the
facts in the light of that that's a
question that's raised in your mind but
not one to which we had an answer so you
don't do that in your report you
certainly raise it as a question yes did
you come close to in dying George Bush
No well she said that the the activities
were carried out by people who then
found out that they couldn't do they
couldn't carry out the president's
wishes without violating the law yet
attorney general means defends himself
by saying that in fact they believed
that the hawk shipment in 1985 wasn't
illegal and they never believed it was
illegal so there was no motive for a
cover-up and well how do you how do you
respond to the legal issues and what
laws if any did the November hawk
shipment violate all I can say is that
if you look at the notes of the November
24th 1986 meeting how is it the two
people writing separate sets of notes
Donald Regan and secretary Weinberger
both say that he said it might be
illegal or it could be illegal and why
and then you have the the notes of
senator showed of secretary Schultz is
debriefing that they are rearranging the
record so that that's just starters okay
yes yes you seem to draw a distinction
in terms of the moral footing on which
President Reagan stood and President
Bush stood I wonder what that was based
upon because throughout this report you
get the the clear message that this was
directed at least generally from the top
the president wanted the the rebels
supported body and soul he wanted a
trade arms for hostages how can you in
any way separate President Reagan from
this policy and from this calamity the
only only thing you can you can't but
the only the differences between a
motive and a maybe erroneous view that
this was in the public interest and the
and aid Act which in no way can be
justified as an act and the public if it
can only be act either as an act of
friendship or an act of self-protection
separate the moral culpability of a
principle the president President Reagan
in this case and his deputy political
deputy George Bush how is Bush more
culpable than his principle well I was
thought
about the pardon in other words the
pardon is not justified on he was no
longer Reagan's deputy breagan didn't
pardon anybody pushed it this constant
right it's constitutional right but his
motive is a different questioning and
they had perfectly constitutional right
the deposition on page 473 we have
bushland 111 88 basically admitting that
he was regularly informed of events
connected with the Iran arms sales that
was at the very beginning of the 88
presidential campaign did you feel that
you should have maybe broken that news a
little earlier than today no I actually
I didn't I didn't realize that we were
breaking any news in the 1988 to during
the 1988 campaign we tried to avoid that
no I did make we obviously made a
misjudgment in the second indictment of
Weinberger but that was not news that
was that was that was both all the
information but it was picked up as
though it were them in the early months
this is outside your jurisdiction I
could grow the rice but in January of
1988 the hottest issue in the country
was whether George Bush know about the
arms deal and you haven't your
deposition here on 111 in that year they
admitted regularly being informed events
connected with it did you think that
information was that made public i guy I
don't think we were in the and that we
were just releasing information because
of campaign purposes at all any time yes
sir come to the dining weinberg I mean
the Schultz niece and Regan hi III think
the report states pretty clearly I it's
a matter that under the law we had to
consider and it was a matter which
received very careful attention but
that's different from saying we came
close
just on another subject briefly you said
before that you wished you had a larger
staff center do you wish and represent
given the concern in the cover-up that
you face that you wish to be hired more
experienced seizing the prosecutors to
supervise some of the younger lawyers I
wish actually we could have a if you ask
Mary she'll give you a roster of our of
our associate counsel
it's rather I went over just a few days
ago I it's rather impressive the number
of former assistant US attorneys and
indeed US attorneys who were on the
staff and particularly in the early
period when these things were being done
there was most of the team leaders were
former assistant US attorneys or and
then in the poindexter trial he was
tried by a former US attorney why and
even the younger lawyers had all had
been exposed to do government activity
there I would say 7/8 of them were
former law clerks of judges it was an
extraordinarily fine group of people and
in some ways I wish I had put their
histories in the report as well as their
periods of service but I I don't think
that was a problem that we had and in
the end the the follow-up investigation
was conducted by Craig Gillan who for 12
years had been in the US Attorney's
Office in Atlanta first as an assistant
US attorney then as a supervising
assistant US attorney and then at the
head of the narcotics strike force so I
mean what what are you going to do he
had three times as much experience as
most people you're going to find
available for this kind of work
sooner those is an answer
all right off the first 10 people better
than I took let's see who was there
there was Bromwich from the US
Attorney's Office of New York to Azure
know from the US Attorney's Office of
New York there was Swartz from the US
Attorney's Office of New York there was
an odd Rhys grouse from the US
Attorney's Office of New York who'd been
the head of their frauds unit ahead of
their appellate unit so there was John
Douglas who was assistant US attorney
who had tried the spy case in Baltimore
so half of them right there are that I
had known but to think I might think of
another one or two so but we we would
did not lack for experienced prosecutors
at any time yes if I could push the
impeachment question one step further
suppose that in 1987 knowing what you
know now you'd been a member of the
United States Congress would you have
thought would you have wanted to push
for impeachment I think earlier in you
indicated it was not likely and now I'm
asking you what your personal view would
have been if you'd been in that role I
think my personal view would have been
that the investigation should have gone
more slowly that it should have
developed thoroughly the facts so that
all alternatives could be considered and
certainly the President Reagan and vice
president push it up in question what if
that it all happened and everything had
been on the table that's on the table
now how would you have voted on the
issue well III don't think I'm going to
get into that kind of speculation
because I when I laughed the political
background for it and I don't think that
a discussion of a criminal investigation
and prosecution conducted by a lawyer
should be drawn into a consideration of
such an important political impeachment
is both a political and a legal question
and it requires a very broad judgment
and it's something that any any Congress
would be very hesitant to do
particularly when the president thought
he was acting in the public interest
some pretty harsh criticisms of you
through the years and even they've
gotten pretty personal
have you reacted to them
have anything you'd like to say now to
respond to those critics when I started
doing work as a prosecutor way back more
years ago and I hate but I like to think
but a long long time ago and one of the
first things you learn is the standard
rule of defense conduct if the law is
against you this is a defense lawyer
cocky now if the law is against you try
the case on the facts if the facts are
against you try the case on the law if
both the law and the facts are against
you attack the prosecutor it's a
cardinal rule and it always works and
it's always good it's usually good when
when the prosecutor in the trial finds
himself under that kind of personal
attack because he's going to have a jury
and believe it or not juries are very
intelligent people by and large they
have a sense of who is fair and who
isn't and if you attack a fair
prosecutor in the end you suffer by it
and I hope that as you look at the
report you'll conclude we were fair
first of all that's the four most
important thing that we were fair and
that you will look at the then look at
those who criticize us and the things
they say about us in that light little
dill for the investigation I don't know
it's in the in volume two there's a
financial report that was improperly
indexed but we we've tried to we're
correcting that right away and adding in
as i remembereth the GAO added in the
costs of the FBI and other people who
assisted us and also when they applied
the rules of the executive branch we had
to erecto actively pick up some other
expenses i 37 billion comes in my mind
now that's that's pretty close
so what well I think I think it is worth
it and why for two reasons one I don't
think it could have been done much
cheaper and second I think it is
extraordinarily important that people in
high level of government and
particularly in the national security
areas where they think the facts are not
going to come out that people in those
areas realize they can be prosecuted
they can be convicted of felonies and
that even though the criminal procedures
are time consuming and somewhat clumsy
they work the countries put the
iran-contra scandal behind them and that
he has no problem with now running for
the Senate gee is there anything that's
gonna come out in this report that's
going to give Oliver North a hard time I
realized it that way reflect on what
it's been - to work on this case for the
past seven years personally and and what
are your plans now about the heart the
person who was hit hardest it was my
wife who's been sort of left alone for
the six or seven years and I don't think
we would want to do that again
but I think I don't I don't think that a
lawyer really should not accept an
assignment like this if he's asked to do
so by a court that's part of his duties
had the privilege of being a lawyer for
a long time and he's expected to do
services from now and now and then for
the court so I I I'm sorry I think
there's no question that I should have
done it I just wouldn't want to do it
over
go back and private practice that
crowing Dunlevy and in Oklahoma City
yeah if the Attorney General were
directly elected by the people I I think
one of the great values of our
Constitution is the President does
control the executive branch of
government and he but right or wrong he
he in the end gets the criticism or the
praise and the the the check of Senate
confirmation I think is quite adequate
and I speak carefully because I've
worked in states where there has been an
elected Attorney General and in New York
for example the Attorney General is
elected to state controllers elected I
always I was the governor's counsel and
had very good relations with them we
never had a cross word but the governor
or the President or the chief executive
has a responsibility and he should have
the point of power it seems I have the
power to make sure that the
president and as you just experienced
for seven years behave yourself
well they have there there are a number
of check the the oversight of Congress
is probably the most important and the
other thing is that in in in in
Washington I think we have may the the
press and the media are are outstanding
I mean but I have come from I've worked
in a number of communities at various
times but the aggressiveness yeah its
variety I think it's extremely hard to
keep secrets in Washington and if you
can't keep secrets sooner or later
congressional oversight it's going to be
called for if there's anything wrong but
if Congress was so successful in doing
that oversight function and they when
they needed to have you it goes to the I
don't think you're argumentative I think
you make a very good point but the the
fact is Congress was not given the facts
and it was an unusually successful
exercise and secrecy that those carrying
out the president's wishes were able to
achieve the fact Congress twice asked
the president for information on Colonel
Norris activities and twice was right to
you know Congress has got a lot of
things to deal with than to take on and
challenge and can start conducting
hearings about the activities of a
president when it has it believes in
good faith it's been told the truth that
certain things that was worried about
didn't happen here why since you
provided a very important function
now those without your reference these
things I said you provided us as
independent counsel yeah a very
important function right now I guess I'm
not clear why you don't want the public
to be able to directly elect someone to
do your function well it I whether there
should be someone separate from the
Attorney General is a different question
than whether the Attorney General should
be elected okay now well there should be
someone separate on a permanent basis
the trouble with that is any agency that
carries out over a long period of time
with no refreshing tends to sooner or
later drop back into a commonplace
approach to things now maybe that's good
maybe it's bad but that's the argument
against it and I think you have to
evaluate that you notice it in
regulatory I where I was counsel to a
regulatory agency for a while a very
good one but you become you begin to
become you know friendly with the people
you're regulating and you become it
becomes less and less a standoff
adversarial process and more and more a
one of a congregation thank you very
much